Document "Getting Started/create and publish packages" (#173)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/get_started/get-started-packaging.md

::: zone pivot="os-linux,os-macos"

```bash
export VCPKG_ROOT=/path/to/vcpkg
export PATH=$VCPKG_ROOT:$PATH
```

> [!NOTE]
> Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable using the `export` command only affects the current shell session. To make this change permanent across sessions, you'll need to add the `export` command to your shell's profile script (e.g., `~/.bashrc` or `~/.zshrc`).

::: zone-end

::: zone pivot="os-windows"

```console
set VCPKG_ROOT="C:\path\to\vcpkg"
set PATH=%VCPKG_ROOT%;%PATH%
```

> [!NOTE]
> Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable using the `set` command only affects the current shell session. To make this change permanent across sessions, you can use the `setx` command and restart the shell session.

::: zone-end

Setting `VCPKG_ROOT` tells vcpkg where your vcpkg instance is located.
Adding it to `PATH` ensures you can run vcpkg commands directly from the shell.

## 3 - Set up the port files

1. First, create a new folder under the `vcpkg/ports/` directory named `vcpkg-sample-library`

2. Next, create the `vcpkg.json` file within the `vcpkg-sample-library` folder with the following content:
   
   ```json

>     {
>     "name": "vcpkg-sample-library",
>     "version": "1.0.3",
>     "homepage": "https://github.com/JavierMatosD/vcpkg-sample-library",
>     "description": "A sample C++ library designed to serve as a foundational example for a tutorial on packaging libraries with vcpkg.",
>     "license": "MIT",
>     "dependencies": [
>         {
>         "name" : "vcpkg-cmake",
>         "host" : true
>         },
>         {
>         "name" : "vcpkg-cmake-config",
>         "host" : true
>         },
>         {
>         "name": "fmt"
>         }
>     ]
>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {
      "name": "vcpkg-sample-library",
      "version": "1.0.3",
      "homepage": "https://github.com/JavierMatosD/vcpkg-sample-library",
      "description": "A sample C++ library designed to serve as a foundational example for a tutorial on packaging libraries with vcpkg.",
      "license": "MIT",
      "dependencies": [
        {
          "name" : "vcpkg-cmake",
          "host" : true
        },
        {
          "name" : "vcpkg-cmake-config",
          "host" : true
        },
        {
          "name": "fmt"
        }
      ]
    }
```

    ```
    TODO: provide line-by-line explanation
    TODO: For more information on `vcpkg.json`, see the following:

3. Now, create the `usage` file within the `vcpkg-sample-library` folder with the following content:

   ```
   vcpkg-sample-library provides CMake targets:
   
   find_package(my_sample_lib CONFIG REQUIRED)
   target_link_libraries(main PRIVATE my_sample_lib::my_sample_lib)
   ```

>    Providing usage documentation for ports allows users to easily adopt them in their projects. We highly encourage providing a `usage` file within the port's directory (`ports/<port name>/usage`) that describes the minimal steps necessary to integrate with a build system.

Reviewer: We should mention that to know what the correct usage is:
* the port author uses whatever is instructed by upstream, or
* the port author goes through the library's build system and finds the exported targets (not always easy).

   TODO: link to usage reference documentation

4. Finally, create the `portfile.cmake` file within the `vcpkg-sample-library` folder with the following content:
      
   ```
    vcpkg_check_linkage(ONLY_STATIC_LIBRARY)

    vcpkg_from_github(
        OUT_SOURCE_PATH SOURCE_PATH
        REPO JavierMatosD/vcpkg-sample-library
        REF "${VERSION}"
        SHA512 0  # This is a temporary value. We will modify this value in the next section.
        HEAD_REF main
    )

    vcpkg_cmake_configure(
        SOURCE_PATH "${SOURCE_PATH}"
    )

    vcpkg_cmake_install()

    vcpkg_cmake_config_fixup(PACKAGE_NAME "my_sample_lib")

    file(REMOVE_RECURSE "${CURRENT_PACKAGES_DIR}/debug/include")

    file(INSTALL "${SOURCE_PATH}/LICENSE" DESTINATION "${CURRENT_PACKAGES_DIR}/share/${PORT}" RENAME copyright)
    configure_file("${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/usage" "${CURRENT_PACKAGES_DIR}/share/${PORT}/usage" COPYONLY)
    ```

    TODO: Line-by-line explanation:

    TODO: link to portfile reference documentation

## 4 - Update SHA512 for `portfile.cmake`

Run:

```console
vcpkg install vcpkg-sample-library
```

You will get a long error message. Scan the output until you find:
```console

> .
> .
> .
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

::: zone-end
::: zone pivot="shell-cmd"

```console
set VCPKG_ROOT="C:\path\to\vcpkg"
set PATH=%VCPKG_ROOT%;%PATH%
```

> [!NOTE]
> Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable using the `set` command only affects the current shell session. To make this change permanent across sessions, you can use the `setx` command and restart the shell session.

::: zone-end
::: zone pivot="shell-powershell"

```powershell
$env:VCPKG_ROOT = "C:\path\to\vcpkg"
$env:PATH = "$env:VCPKG_ROOT;$env:PATH"
```

> [!NOTE]
> Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` and updating the `PATH` environment variables in this manner only affects the current PowerShell session. To make these changes permanent across all sessions, you should add them to your PowerShell profile or set them through the Windows System Environment Variables panel.
::: zone-end

Setting `VCPKG_ROOT` tells vcpkg where your vcpkg instance is located.
Adding it to `PATH` ensures you can run vcpkg commands directly from the shell.

## 3 - Set up the custom overlay

> 1. Create a new directory called `custom-overlay` next to the `Hello World` project you created in the [Install and use packages with CMake](get-started.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a new directory called `custom-overlay` next to the `Hello World` project you created in the [Install and use packages with CMake](get-started.md) tutorial.
```

::: zone-end
::: zone pivot="shell-powershell"

```powershell
$env:VCPKG_ROOT = "C:\path\to\vcpkg"
$env:PATH = "$env:VCPKG_ROOT;$env:PATH"
```

> [!NOTE]
> Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` and updating the `PATH` environment variables in this manner only affects the current PowerShell session. To make these changes permanent across all sessions, you should add them to your PowerShell profile or set them through the Windows System Environment Variables panel.
::: zone-end

Setting `VCPKG_ROOT` tells vcpkg where your vcpkg instance is located.
Adding it to `PATH` ensures you can run vcpkg commands directly from the shell.

## 3 - Set up the custom overlay

1. Create a new directory called `custom-overlay` next to the `Hello World` project you created in the [Install and use packages with CMake](get-started.md).
2. Within `custom-overlay` directory, create a folder named `vcpkg-sample-library`.

## 4 - Set up the port files

First, create the `vcpkg.json` file within the `custom-overlay\vcpkg-sample-library` folder with the following content:
   
```json
{
  "name": "vcpkg-sample-library",

>   "version": "1.0.3",

Reviewer: why not `1.0.0`?

>   "version": "1.0.3",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "version": "1.0.0",
```

I created a `1.0.0` tag for the sample lib code.

Now, create the `usage` file within the `custom-overlay\vcpkg-sample-library` directory with the following content:

```
vcpkg-sample-library provides CMake targets:

find_package(my_sample_lib CONFIG REQUIRED)
target_link_libraries(main PRIVATE my_sample_lib::my_sample_lib)
```

Providing usage documentation for ports allows users to easily adopt them in their projects. We highly encourage providing a `usage` file within the port's directory (`ports/<port name>/usage`) that describes the minimal steps necessary to integrate with a build system. To determine the correct usage instructions it is recommended to follow upstream's guidance. In the case that upstream does not provide usage information, it may be necessary to dig through their build system to find the exported targets.

For more guidance, see [handling usage files](../maintainers/handling-usage-files.md)

Finally, create the `portfile.cmake` file within the `custom-overlay\vcpkg-sample-library` directory with the following content:

```
vcpkg_check_linkage(ONLY_STATIC_LIBRARY)

vcpkg_from_github(
    OUT_SOURCE_PATH SOURCE_PATH

>     REPO JavierMatosD/vcpkg-sample-library
>     REF "${VERSION}"
>     SHA512 0  # This is a temporary value. We will modify this value in the next section.
>     HEAD_REF main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    REPO Microsoft/vcpkg-docs
    REF "${VERSION}"
    SHA512 0  # This is a temporary value. We will modify this value in the next section.
    HEAD_REF cmake-sample-lib
```

---

> title: Create and publish packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Tutorial: Create and publish packages"
```

description: Tutorial guides the user through the process of packaging a library for vcpkg.
zone_pivot_group_filename: zone-pivot-groups.json
zone_pivot_groups: operating-systems
author: JavierMatosD
ms.author: javiermat
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 08/23/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
#CustomerIntent: As a beginner C++ developer, I want to learn how to package libraries for vcpkg.
---

# Tutorial: Create and publish packages

> This tutorial shows you how to publish a simle library for the vcpkg registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows you how to publish a simple library for the vcpkg registry.
```

[!INCLUDE [setup-vcpkg](includes/setup-vcpkg.md)]

## 2 - Configure the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable

To set the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variables, run the following commands:

::: zone pivot="os-linux,os-macos"

```bash
export VCPKG_ROOT=/path/to/vcpkg
export PATH=$VCPKG_ROOT:$PATH
```

> [!NOTE]
> Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable using the `export` command only affects the current shell session. To make this change permanent across sessions, you'll need to add the `export` command to your shell's profile script (e.g., `~/.bashrc` or `~/.zshrc`).

::: zone-end

::: zone pivot="os-windows"

```console
set VCPKG_ROOT="C:\path\to\vcpkg"
set PATH=%VCPKG_ROOT%;%PATH%
```

> [!NOTE]
> Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable using the `set` command only affects the current shell session. To make this change permanent across sessions, you can use the `setx` command and restart the shell session.

::: zone-end

Setting `VCPKG_ROOT` tells vcpkg where your vcpkg instance is located.
Adding it to `PATH` ensures you can run vcpkg commands directly from the shell.

## 3 - Set up the port

To create the `portfile.cmake` and `vcpkg.json` files for the new port, run:

> ```console

Reviewer: We should separate the command-line from its output so that users can click on the "Copy to clipboard" button and paste the command on their terminal

# Tutorial: Create and publish packages

> This tutorial guides you on how to package a library for vcpkg using a custom overlay. Before you proceed, ensure you've followed the [Install and use packages with CMake](get-started.md) tutorial as a starting point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial guides you on how to package a library for vcpkg using a custom overlay. We recommended that you read the [Install and use packages with CMake](get-started.md) tutorial before proceeding.
```
